Edge 135 web platform release notes (#3398)
MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer: microsoft-edge/web-platform/release-notes/135.md

Reviewer: general antipattern i'm fixing is _break up long sentences_, like AcroLinx suggests to an extreme degree.  readability = use **short** writing-constructs, eg short words/ sentences / sections/ paragraphs.
@captainbrosset

The `loaded` and `total` attributes of a ProgressEvent indicate the current progress. The type of these attributes is now `double`, which gives developers more control over the value. For example, developers can now create a ProgressEvent with the value of `total` set to `1` and the the value of `loaded` increasing from `0` to `1` gradually. This aligns the event with the default behavior of the `<progress>` HTML element if the `max` attribute is omitted.

<!-- ---------- -->
###### fetchLater API

`fetchLater()` is a JavaScript API to send a deferred fetch request. Once sent, a deferred request is queued by the browser in a _pending_ state, and will be invoked by the earliest of the following conditions:

* The document is destroyed.
* After a user-specified time.
* When the browser decides it's time to send the request.

The API returns a `FetchLaterResult` that contains the `activated` boolean field, which may be updated to tell whether the deferred request has been sent or not. On successful sending, the response is ignored by browser, including its body and headers.

<!-- ---------- -->
###### highlightsFromPoint API

> The `highlightsFromPoint()` API enables developers to interact with CSS Custom Highlights by detecting which highlights exist at a specific point within a document. Getting highlights from a point can be used by web apps to manage user interactions with custom highlights, such as responding to user clicks or hover events on highlighted regions to trigger custom tooltips or contextual menus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `highlightsFromPoint()` API enables your webpages to interact with CSS Custom Highlights, by detecting which highlights exist at a specific point within a document.

Getting highlights from a point can be used by a web app to manage user interactions with custom highlights, such as responding to user clicks or hover events on a highlighted region, to trigger a custom tooltip or contextual menu.
```
good example of increasing the clarity by rewording from plural to singular
@captainbrosset

## Web platform features

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### CSS features

<!-- ---------- -->
###### CSS carousel widget: `::column` pseudo-element

The `::column` CSS pseudo-element represents the individual columns in a multi-column container.

The container can be styled with a limited amount of CSS properties.

The container can be snapped to by its scrolling container, by using `::scroll-marker` pseudo-elements.

<!-- ---------- -->
###### CSS carousel widget: `::scroll-marker` and `::scroll-marker-groups` pseudo-elements

The `::scroll-marker` and `::scroll-markers-group` pseudo-elements allow creating a set of focusable markers within a scroll container.

The set of focusable markers is used to snap the scroll container to specific positions.

<!-- ---------- -->
###### CSS carousel widget: `::scroll-button()` pseudo-element

The `::scroll-button()` pseudo-element allows creating scroll buttons as pseudo-elements of a scroll container.

The scroll buttons are used to scroll the container in the direction of the button, when the scroll buttons are clicked.

<!-- ---------- -->
###### Nested pseudo-elements styling

> Pseudo-elements that are nested inside other pseudo-elements can now be styled, by using `::before::marker` and `::after::marker`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pseudo-elements that are nested inside other pseudo-elements can now be styled, by using `::before::marker` and `::after::marker`.

`::column::scroll-marker` is not yet supported.
```
Shall we specify the item of interest that's not supported yet?  This suggested wording is better than promising "will be added".

orig draft:
Pseudo-elements that are nested inside other pseudo-elements can now be styled. So far, `::before::marker` and `::after::marker` are supported. Support for `::column::scroll-marker` will be added in the future.

Author: Yes, I believe we need to add the bit about `::column::scroll-marker`.

* In vertical writing-mode, `overflow-inline` maps to `overflow-y`.

<!-- ---------- -->
###### CSS `abs()` and `sign()` functions

The `abs(A)` function returns the absolute value of _A_, as the same type as the input.  The return type is a `<number>`.

The `sign(A)` function returns:
* `-1` if the numeric value of _A_ is negative.
* `+1` if the numeric value of _A_ is positive.
* `0` otherwise.

The return type is a `<number>`.

<!-- ---------- -->
###### CSS anchor positioning: remembered scroll offset

When a positioned element has a default anchor, and is tethered to this anchor at one edge, and against the original containing block at the other edge, the scroll offset will be taken into account when sizing the element.

Taking the scroll offset into account when sizing the element enables using all visible space for the anchored element (by using `position-area`) when the document is scrolled at a given scroll offset.

In order to avoid resizing the element every time the document is scrolled, the "remembered scroll offset" concept is used, rather than always using the current scroll offset.

<!-- ---------- -->
###### CSS `dynamic-range-limit` property

> The `dynamic-range-limit` CSS property allows limiting the maximum brightness of HDR<!-- todo: define/expand HDR --> content.

Reviewer: define/expand "HDR"

Author: High Dynamic Range

The Web Speech API uses the user's default microphone as the default audio input.  MediaStreamTrack support allows a website to use the Web Speech API to caption other sources of audio, including remote audio tracks.

<!-- ---------- -->
###### Partitioning `:visited` links history

To eliminate user browsing history leaks, HTML `<a>` elements are now styled as `:visited` only if they have been clicked from the top-level site and frame origin before.  This means that Microsoft Edge now partitions visited links according to three keys:
* Link URL.
* Top-level site.
* Frame origin.

By only styling links that have been clicked on this site and frame before, side-channel attacks that have been developed to obtain `:visited` links styling information are now obsolete.

_Self-links_ are excluded from this; links to a site's own pages can be styled as `:visited` even if they have not been clicked on in this exact top-level site and frame origin before.  This exemption is only enabled in top-level frames or subframes which are same-origin with the top-level frame.

<!-- ---------- -->
###### Create service worker client and inherit service worker controller for iframe with `srcdoc`

> Documents created by iframes that use the `srcdoc` attribute are now service worker clients that are covered by their parent's service worker.<!-- todo: change plural to singular for clarity -->

Reviewer: rewrite, changing plural to singular for clarity: 
Documents created by iframes that use the `srcdoc` attribute are now service worker clients that are covered by their parent's service worker.

<!-- ---------- -->
###### Dispatching click events to captured pointer

If a pointer is captured while the `pointerup` event is being dispatched, the `click` event is dispatched to the captured target, instead of being dispatched to the nearest common ancestor of `pointerdown` and `pointerup` events.

<!-- ---------- -->
###### Float16Array

The `Float16Array` typed array is now supported.  Number values are rounded to half-precision float-point format (IEEE FP16) when writing into a `Float16Array` instance.

<!-- ---------- -->
###### HSTS tracking prevention

> Mitigates user tracking by third-parties via the HSTS<!-- todo: define HSTS --> cache.

Reviewer: expand/define "HSTS"

> Mitigates user tracking by third-parties via the HSTS<!-- todo: define HSTS --> cache.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mitigates user tracking by third-parties via the HTTP Strict Transport Security (HSTS) cache.
```
tech review this suggestion @captainbrosset

List of changes:

| Old name | New name |
| --- | --- |
| `extension-messaging`, `pending-permission-request`, `not-main-frame`, `frame-navigating`, `timeout`, `cookie-disabled`, `cookie-removed`, `printing`, `web-database`, `injected-javascript`, and `injected-stylesheet` | `masked` |
| `response-method-not-get` | `request-method-not-get` |
| `serviceworker-version-activation` | `serviceworker-version-activated` |
| `serviceworker-added-after-bfcache` | `serviceworker-added` |
| `serviceworker-unregistration` | `serviceworker-unregistered` |
| `unload-handler` | `unload-listener` |
| `session-restored` | `null` |

<!-- ---------- -->
###### Observable API

Observables are a popular reactive-programming paradigm to handle an asynchronous stream of push-based events.  Observables can be thought of as Promises but for multiple events, and aim to do what Promises did for callbacks and nesting.  That is, Observables allow ergonomic event handling, by providing an `Observable` object that represents the asynchronous flow of events.

> You can "subscribe" to this object to receive events as they come in, and call any of its operators or combinators to declaratively describe the flow of transformations through which events go.  This is in contrast with the _imperative_ version, which often requires complicated nesting with approaches such as `addEventListener()`.  For more on this, see the examples in the explainer.<!-- todo: link to the explainer.  if that's the next link, clarify. -->

Reviewer: Observable API - link to the explainer.  coord. w/ the spec link

See the [W3C Observable specification](https://wicg.github.io/observable/).

<!-- ---------- -->
###### Service worker client URL now ignores `history.pushState` changes

> The `Client.url` property of a service worker now ignores document URL changes that are made by the `history.pushState()` method and other similar history APIs.  The `Client.url` property is intended to be the creation URL of the HTML document,<!-- todo: check meaning of comma vs no comma --> which ignores such changes.

Reviewer: confirm whether to use comma.  or clarify.  read it w/ comma & without; which one gives clearest meaning?

<!-- ---------- -->
###### Timestamps for RTC Encoded Frames

The following timestamps are now exposed:

* Capture timestamp: The timestamp when a frame was originally captured.
* Receive timestamp: The timestamp when a frame was received.

These timestamps are present in WebRTC-encoded frames that are transmitted via `RTCPeerConnection`.

This change allows video conferencing applications which use WebRTC to implement latency measurements to better understand performance.

<!-- ---------- -->
###### Use the `double` type for ProgressEvent's `loaded` and `total` attributes

> The `loaded` and `total` attributes of a `ProgressEvent` indicate the current progress.  The type of these attributes is now `double`, which gives you more control over the value than `int`<!-- todo: what was the previous type? --> gave.

Reviewer: double gives more control than which previous numeric type?

> For example, you can now create a `ProgressEvent` with the value of `total` set to `1`, and then the value of `loaded` increases from `0` to `1` gradually.<!-- todo: how was it before? -->

Reviewer: what was the previous, bad behavior?  vs gradual increase from 0 to 1

To learn more about origin trials, see [Use origin trials in Microsoft Edge](../../origin-trials/index.md).

To see the full list of available origin trials, see [Microsoft Edge Origin Trials](https://developer.microsoft.com/microsoft-edge/origin-trials/).

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Microsoft Edge-only origin trials

<!-- ---------- -->
###### Digital Goods API

Expires on March 31, 2025.

The Digital Goods API allows a web application to get information about their digital products and the user’s purchases managed by a digital store.  The user agent abstracts connections to the store, and the Payment Request API is used to make purchases.

* [Explainer](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/blob/main/PwaDigitalGoods/explainer.md)
* [Feedback](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/issues/new?labels=Digital+Goods%20API,OriginTrialFeedback&amp;title=%5BDigital%20Goods%20API%5D+Feedback)
* [Register](https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/origin-trials/trials/4b4a9ead-d912-4349-87b3-25e5e50b4f13)

<!-- ---------- -->
###### Web App LocalFolder Access

Expires on March 31, 2025.

> Web App LocalFolder Access allows a Microsoft Store-installed Progressive Web App (PWA) to access file content that was previously stored in the WinRT `ApplicationData.LocalFolder` folder by an earlier,<!-- todo: analyze implication of comma vs no comma --> UWP version of the application.

Reviewer: "earlier, UWP version of the application" -- confirm whether to use comma.  or clarify.  

Which one gives clearest meaning?  Can we increase clarity to specify which thing?
* to access file content that was previously stored in the WinRT `ApplicationData.LocalFolder` folder by an earlier UWP version of the application.
* to access file content that was previously stored in the WinRT `ApplicationData.LocalFolder` folder by an earlier, UWP version of the application.

Are we switching from a UWP version of app to a non-UWP version of app?  If so, use comma.
Is the earlier & updated version of the app both UWP?  If so, omit comma, maybe move the word "UWP" out.

* [Explainer](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/blob/main/LocalFolder/explainer.md)
* [Feedback](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/issues/new?labels=LocalFolder+Access,OriginTrialFeedback&amp;title=%5BLocalFolder%20Access%5D+Feedback)
* [Register](https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/origin-trials/trials/2b21a8cd-43aa-41da-810d-fad103e699dc)

<!-- ---------- -->
###### HTML+IDL handwriting attribute

Expires on June 14, 2025.

> Granular per-document and per-element control over which content should (dis)allow<!-- todo: ungrammatical, confusing, clarify --> handwriting input.

Reviewer: do not use:   (dis)allow

rewrite in plain explicit direct language to explain how it works, using dictionary words & grammar.
